JUDY WOODRUFF: As we
reported earlier, Russian
President Vladimir Putin
seemed to hint today
at Russian involvement
in hacking during last
year's presidential
campaign, not by government
agents, but by what he
called patriotically-minded
individuals.
Meantime, the fallout
from the Trump campaign's
alleged contacts with
Russia, and the ongoing
tensions between Washington
and Moscow, continue
on several fronts.
John Yang has more.
JOHN YANG: Late last
year, in response to the
Russian campaign meddling,
the Obama administration
expelled 35 suspected Russian
intelligence operatives from
the United States, and seized
two long-held Russian diplomatic
compounds, one on the Eastern
Shore of Maryland, the
other on the North
Shore of Long Island.
Today, the Washington
Post reports that the
Trump White House is now
considering returning
those properties, which
are widely considered
intelligence-gathering hubs.
What's more, Politico reports
that alleged Russian spies
have been turning up in odd
places around the United States,
often near parts of the nation's
critical telecommunications
network.
It's one part of what U.S.
intelligence officials
see as intensifying
Russian espionage and
counterespionage measures
both here and in Russia.
With me now for more on these
stories are Karen DeYoung of
The Washington Post and Ali
Watkins of Politico.
Thanks to you both.
These two stories are
different enough, I want to
handle them one at a time.
So, apologies to you, Ali.
I want the turn first
to Karen DeYoung.
Karen, walk us through
how this is coming about.
The Obama administration took
away these compounds to punish
the Russians, and now the Trump
White House is talking
about giving them back?
KAREN DEYOUNG, The Washington
Post: Well, they were not --
although the Russians charged
that they were expropriated,
they're still the property
of the Russian government.
What the Americans did in the
Obama administration was to ban
the Russians from having access
to them.
They told them they all had
to leave in 24 hours, and
they couldn't come back.
And then the FBI and other
agencies went in and proved
to their own satisfaction that
what they thought was happening
there was actually happening.
The Trump administration in
a meeting with - - between
Secretary Tillerson, Secretary
of State Tillerson and the
Russian foreign minister, Sergei
Lavrov, last month said that
they would drop what had been
a linkage between the two, what
the Trump administration had
said was linkage between letting
the Russians go back into
the buildings and have access
to them again and the Russians
giving up a situation that
had been going on for several
years in St. Petersburg,
where, in response to previous
U.S. sanctions against Russia
over Ukraine, the Russians had
refused to allow the Americans
to build a new consulate
in St. Petersburg.
And so the administration
had said, well, let's -- you
give us our consulate, and we
will give you back
your building.
The Russians said, no, you're
in the wrong and we're not.
This was an illegal
expropriation.
And a couple days later, when
Foreign Minister Lavrov was
here, the Americans said, OK, we
won't link them anymore.
And since then, the Americans
have been working on specific
proposals to give the Russians
about the conditions under
which they will give them back.
The Russians said today
in Moscow that -- that
Tillerson had told them
that they would send
them specific proposals, but
they haven't gotten anything
yet, but they're still confident
that they're going to
get their compounds back.
JOHN YANG: And, Ali, talking
about sort of Russian
activities, let's turn to you.
Your reporting found
that U.S. intelligence
officials were finding
Russian diplomats turning
up in odd places around
the country, right?
ALI WATKINS, Politico: This
has been kind of a growing
concern of what my understanding
is the FBI over the
last year-and-a-half
of Russian diplomats
within the U.S. who are
supposed to follow pretty
stringent travel rules.
They're supposed to notify
the State Department when they
travel anywhere outside of their
posting.
The Russian diplomats
effectively disregarding
those travel rules and
turning up in places
that they shouldn't have been
or that they never told the
State Department they were
going.
JOHN YANG: And what do
they think they were up to?
ALI WATKINS: Yes.
As U.S. intelligence officials
started kind of looking at
where these guys were turning
up, they would turn up
over where a fiber-optics
cable ran underground, or
these strange locations
that when, taken as a whole, it
was -- became clear that they
were on some kind of mission
to kind of map the
infrastructure.
The intel part went to this
infrastructure mapping of
some of the telecommunications
networks in the country.
JOHN YANG: And was this
-- is this a change
from previous behavior?
Does it seem like the Russians
are emboldened somehow?
ALI WATKINS: You know, there
is an element of this that's
kind of par for the course.
There is natural
intelligence gathering.
The whole art of espionage
is trying to do things that a
host country doesn't want you
to do.
But what's different about this
is that there's been kind of a
burgeoning debate, particularly
over the last year with this
election operation, of the U.S.,
particularly under the Obama
administration, being unwilling
to fight back on this, and
not cracking down as much as
they could, when they know that
these Russian diplomats who are
presumed intelligence operatives
are doing these things, brazenly
disregarding these rules that
they're supposed to follow.
JOHN YANG: Ali and Karen, let
me ask you both - - and I will
start with you, Ali -- earlier
today, Vladimir Putin again
denied that the Russian state
was involved in the meddling
with the election, but suggested
it could be patriots in Russia.
What do you make of
that statement, Ali?
ALI WATKINS: I mean, there are
some very -- it's a lot of kind
of wordplay going on there,
I think.
Putin is not stupid.
He knows what he's saying, in
that Russian intelligence is
fundamentally different from
U.S. intelligence, in that
there are a lot more gray
zones in the world of Russia.
And when Putin says this
could have been private
sector patriotic actors,
but we didn't know
anything about it on a state
level, from a U.S. perspective,
that might make sense.
An American intelligence
operation isn't
necessarily set up to use
private sector hackers.
But Putin is kind of
exploiting that gray
zone and that disconnect.
So it's not surprising that he'd
say something like that, but
it no doubt comes with a bit
of a wink-wink.
JOHN YANG: Karen, what
do you think of it?
You have been watching the
Russians for a long time.
What do you take of that?
KAREN DEYOUNG: Well, I
think that the allegation
has always been that the
Russians worked through
individuals, non-governmental
individuals, in order to do
this hacking, and that they
were guided by and turned
the information over to
Russian intelligence.
So, I think what Putin is doing
is basically acknowledging that
they did it in a very indirect
way.
And he's kind of thumbing
his nose at the Americans and
saying, you know, you can't
pin this on us, even though
I think that he's not
really fooling anybody.
JOHN YANG: Very good.
Karen DeYoung, Ali Watkins,
thanks for being with us.
KAREN DEYOUNG: You're welcome.